so without further Ado we're going to
without further Ado we're going to keep talking about State expiration
keep talking about State expiration today and I think Garen dropped a
today and I think Garen dropped a bit of a bomb a couple of days ago so
bit of a bomb a couple of days ago so I think we're gonna start with that and
I think we're gonna start with that and again if you can give us a quick
again if you can give us a quick overview of some of the suggested
overview of some of the suggested changes
changes yeah sure so up until this point
yeah sure so up until this point the current Legacy expiration
the current Legacy expiration proposal has had this thing called a
proposal has had this thing called a rent balance so essentially what you
rent balance so essentially what you would do is that whenever you you
would do is that whenever you you know create an entry or want to do a
know create an entry or want to do a rent bump you would put xlm into this
rent bump you would put xlm into this rent balance and then every Ledger a
rent balance and then every Ledger a variable amount of a fee called the rent
variable amount of a fee called the rent fee would be removed from this rent
fee would be removed from this rent balance and the rent feed could either
balance and the rent feed could either decrease or increase based on the size
decrease or increase based on the size of the bucket list and network usage
of the bucket list and network usage so the reasoning behind this initially
so the reasoning behind this initially was that we want to provide some sort of
was that we want to provide some sort of market equilibrium that as The Bucket
market equilibrium that as The Bucket List gets larger and as the price of
List gets larger and as the price of writing to the bucket list increases we
writing to the bucket list increases we also have increased pressure to evict
also have increased pressure to evict and expire entries out of the bucket
and expire entries out of the bucket list and so the thinking with this kind
list and so the thinking with this kind of variable rent fee is that as the
of variable rent fee is that as the Buckle list grows you the rent fee also
Buckle list grows you the rent fee also grows and so that you deduct rent
grows and so that you deduct rent balance more aggressively and so more
balance more aggressively and so more entries will fall to zero or negative
entries will fall to zero or negative rent balances and then be expired more
rent balances and then be expired more frequently so that's kind of the
frequently so that's kind of the original thinking as to why we had this
original thinking as to why we had this variable rent balance and this variable
variable rent balance and this variable rent fee now the issue with that is
rent fee now the issue with that is there's two primary issues the first is
there's two primary issues the first is just the user experience story so with
just the user experience story so with run balance because the rent fee that's
run balance because the rent fee that's deducted is variable from ledger to
deducted is variable from ledger to Ledger you can estimate how many ledgers
Ledger you can estimate how many ledgers you think your entry will be live on the
you think your entry will be live on the network but you can't know for certain
network but you can't know for certain so for instance say if you initially
so for instance say if you initially paid for 100 ledgers of rent
paid for 100 ledgers of rent but you know there are a bunch of
but you know there are a bunch of merges so the bucket list size decreased
merges so the bucket list size decreased a lot then your entry could live much
a lot then your entry could live much longer conversely if you paid for say 10
longer conversely if you paid for say 10 years of rent your entry might only
years of rent your entry might only lasts one year if the network explodes
lasts one year if the network explodes in popularity and the Buckle of size
in popularity and the Buckle of size increases and so it's kind of weird user
increases and so it's kind of weird user interface where the users expect an
interface where the users expect an entry's lifetime to be measured in
entry's lifetime to be measured in ledgers but really you have like this
ledgers but really you have like this rent balance and like this variable
rent balance and like this variable thing you really can't control it and so
thing you really can't control it and so that was issue number one is that it was
that was issue number one is that it was difficult for users to understand and it
difficult for users to understand and it didn't have a great user Story the
didn't have a great user Story the second issue is that of Downstream
second issue is that of Downstream systems and so because the rent fee is
systems and so because the rent fee is variable from ledger to Ledger you don't
variable from ledger to Ledger you don't know when or you can't predict what the
know when or you can't predict what the Run fee will be and so you cannot
Run fee will be and so you cannot predict an entry's rent balance now in
predict an entry's rent balance now in Stellar core we have like this bucket
Stellar core we have like this bucket list data structure which is like you
list data structure which is like you know specially designed with this
know specially designed with this multiple levels and like this log
multiple levels and like this log scripted merge tree approach and we've
scripted merge tree approach and we've designed the rent balance system
designed the rent balance system to work very well with the bucket list
to work very well with the bucket list such that on bucket list and on
such that on bucket list and on bucket list DB you always know exactly
bucket list DB you always know exactly how much rent balance your entry has and
how much rent balance your entry has and we can do this efficiently without
we can do this efficiently without iterating through every entry and then
iterating through every entry and then you know decrementing its rent balance
you know decrementing its rent balance by the current letters rent fee we
by the current letters rent fee we can like you know get around it using
can like you know get around it using some optimizations of the bucket list
some optimizations of the bucket list structure now the issue for Downstream
structure now the issue for Downstream systems is that Downstream systems don't
systems is that Downstream systems don't have a copy of the bucket list you
have a copy of the bucket list you know they're running captive core but
know they're running captive core but the way that a captive Quorum core is
the way that a captive Quorum core is currently designed it's too expensive to
currently designed it's too expensive to query a captive core directly and so
query a captive core directly and so that means that in order for these
that means that in order for these Downstream systems primarily Horizon
Downstream systems primarily Horizon and sort of on RPC nodes in order for
and sort of on RPC nodes in order for them to have accurate rent balance
them to have accurate rent balance information what they would need is to
information what they would need is to essentially either maintain their own
essentially either maintain their own version of The Bucket List and apply
version of The Bucket List and apply rent via like a copy of the bucket list
rent via like a copy of the bucket list or do some like very inefficient
or do some like very inefficient operations
operations with like SQL where you like
with like SQL where you like essentially cache some amount of rent
essentially cache some amount of rent fees and then lazily apply them in the
fees and then lazily apply them in the background or something like that but in
background or something like that but in either case it's it's a lot of work
either case it's it's a lot of work for Downstream systems a lot of disk i o
for Downstream systems a lot of disk i o and things like that so those are these
and things like that so those are these are the two main drawbacks and so when
are the two main drawbacks and so when thinking about this issue we thought
thinking about this issue we thought from our first principles okay do we
from our first principles okay do we need this variable rent fee do we need a
need this variable rent fee do we need a rent balance or can we use a definitive
rent balance or can we use a definitive expiration Ledger and so that's kind of
expiration Ledger and so that's kind of what today's conversation about is rent
what today's conversation about is rent balance versus expiration Ledger now how
balance versus expiration Ledger now how the expiration ledger works is instead
the expiration ledger works is instead of having The Ledger entry store a rent
of having The Ledger entry store a rent balance field that is periodically
balance field that is periodically deducted from instead all it stores is a
deducted from instead all it stores is a single entry which is expiration Ledger
single entry which is expiration Ledger it's very simple essentially before the
it's very simple essentially before the expiration Ledger the entry is live and
expiration Ledger the entry is live and accessible after the expiration Ledger
accessible after the expiration Ledger the entry has run out of rent and is not
the entry has run out of rent and is not accessible and then once the entry is
accessible and then once the entry is passed this expiration Ledger it can be
passed this expiration Ledger it can be expired which is when it's deleted from
expired which is when it's deleted from The Bucket List and then if it's a
The Bucket List and then if it's a temporary entry it could be permanently
temporary entry it could be permanently deleted or if it's a restorable entry
deleted or if it's a restorable entry it's deleted and then stay sent to a
it's deleted and then stay sent to a state restoration node or something like
state restoration node or something like that
that now the advantages to the expiration
now the advantages to the expiration Ledger approach are that it's
Ledger approach are that it's significantly easier for Downstream
significantly easier for Downstream systems because they don't have to
systems because they don't have to periodically update entries with rent
periodically update entries with rent balance information The Meta that's
balance information The Meta that's initially emitted whenever an entry is
initially emitted whenever an entry is created or an entry receives a rent bump
created or an entry receives a rent bump we'll tell Downstream systems exactly
we'll tell Downstream systems exactly when an entry should expire and so it's
when an entry should expire and so it's pretty straightforward from the
pretty straightforward from the implementation standpoint it also makes
implementation standpoint it also makes a lot more sense for users who expect
a lot more sense for users who expect that a lifetime is measured in kind of
that a lifetime is measured in kind of Ledger a discrete and predictable values
Ledger a discrete and predictable values now the drawback to this is that we
now the drawback to this is that we can't have this Dynamic eviction
can't have this Dynamic eviction pressure feature that we have in rent
pressure feature that we have in rent balance so how the expiration Ledger
balance so how the expiration Ledger implementation will work with respect to
implementation will work with respect to fees is what we would do is take
fees is what we would do is take whatever the current market rent fee
whatever the current market rent fee rate is based on the size of The
rate is based on the size of The Blacklist and then lock that right in
Blacklist and then lock that right in and charge that rate for the entire
and charge that rate for the entire lifetime of the object or of the entry
lifetime of the object or of the entry so for instance say you are creating a
so for instance say you are creating a new entry that has one year's worth of
new entry that has one year's worth of rent you would be charged one year's
rent you would be charged one year's worth of rent at the current rent fee
worth of rent at the current rent fee now the issue with this is suppose that
now the issue with this is suppose that within that year The Bucket List size
within that year The Bucket List size increases significantly essentially what
increases significantly essentially what you would be doing is because you locked
you would be doing is because you locked in that rage when the size was small
in that rage when the size was small you'd be paying an artificially low rate
you'd be paying an artificially low rate compared to other entries that are being
compared to other entries that are being added onto the network later
added onto the network later and so you have this weird system where
and so you have this weird system where these entries can be kind of
these entries can be kind of grandfathered in so to speak such that
grandfathered in so to speak such that they pay low fees because it's gotten
they pay low fees because it's gotten at the ground level when the network is
at the ground level when the network is low
low and so with rent balances you don't have
and so with rent balances you don't have this grandfather thing because even if
this grandfather thing because even if you create an entry on Day Zero answer
you create an entry on Day Zero answer up on launch day when the buck list was
up on launch day when the buck list was at you know theoretical smallest size
at you know theoretical smallest size because every entry is subject to the
because every entry is subject to the same variable rent fee no matter when
same variable rent fee no matter when they were created the old entries and
they were created the old entries and new entries are charged the same rate
new entries are charged the same rate however because you have to essentially
however because you have to essentially lock in the rate on creation time around
lock in the rate on creation time around bump time with an expiration Ledger
bump time with an expiration Ledger approach that's not possible
approach that's not possible and so I think what we want to think
and so I think what we want to think about if we want to make expiration
about if we want to make expiration letters work because I think the two
letters work because I think the two benefits to Downstream systems and to
benefits to Downstream systems and to the user experience are very very
the user experience are very very significant benefits and so we should
significant benefits and so we should think about expiration Ledges pretty
think about expiration Ledges pretty seriously
seriously I think that we need to make sure I
I think that we need to make sure I think the thing we want to prevent most
think the thing we want to prevent most are kind of two scenarios first where
are kind of two scenarios first where you have a system where users or there's
you have a system where users or there's smart Contracting can essentially
smart Contracting can essentially provide a storage interface for cheaper
provide a storage interface for cheaper than the protocol can if you can imagine
than the protocol can if you can imagine say on day Zero when the bucket list is
say on day Zero when the bucket list is small someone spins up a smart contract
small someone spins up a smart contract that has public functions that exactly
that has public functions that exactly mirror the storage functions of that the
mirror the storage functions of that the protocol exposes so you have like you
protocol exposes so you have like you know get
know get you know create just the exact same
you know create just the exact same interface but instead of calling it
interface but instead of calling it directly through the sorbon SDK you
directly through the sorbon SDK you would just make a call to a Smart
would just make a call to a Smart contract for your storage needs and so
contract for your storage needs and so what this storage contract could do is
what this storage contract could do is it could just you know buy up say the
it could just you know buy up say the maximum amount of Ledger entries
maximum amount of Ledger entries possible
possible on day Zero with say like 100 years
on day Zero with say like 100 years of rent or some very large value and
of rent or some very large value and essentially permanently lock in those
essentially permanently lock in those entries for 100 years at the lowest
entries for 100 years at the lowest possible rent fee and then say two or
possible rent fee and then say two or three years down the line you know if
three years down the line you know if the Stellar Network explodes and huge
the Stellar Network explodes and huge the rent fee will be significantly
the rent fee will be significantly higher and so what this contract can do
higher and so what this contract can do is essentially auction off this rent
is essentially auction off this rent space at a artificially low rate and so
space at a artificially low rate and so you can essentially use a middleman
you can essentially use a middleman contract to get cheaper storage than you
contract to get cheaper storage than you could if you actually went to the
could if you actually went to the protocol directly and so this is really
protocol directly and so this is really bad from a Network Health perspective
bad from a Network Health perspective because essentially every storage call
because essentially every storage call now has to pass this middleman and so
now has to pass this middleman and so you have lots of additional traffic lots
you have lots of additional traffic lots of additional
of additional overhead for serving storage just
overhead for serving storage just because essentially you have a bug and
because essentially you have a bug and exploitability in the way that you
exploitability in the way that you charge rent
charge rent and so I think to prevent against that
and so I think to prevent against that specific exploit where you have like
specific exploit where you have like these these storage contract
these these storage contract interfaces what you would need is some
interfaces what you would need is some sort of upper bound on the amount of
sort of upper bound on the amount of Ledger or the lifetime of an entry at
Ledger or the lifetime of an entry at any given point essentially the thinking
any given point essentially the thinking being that you know
being that you know if you allow arbitrarily large amounts
if you allow arbitrarily large amounts of rent purchases then you could say
of rent purchases then you could say lock in an entry for 100 years which is
lock in an entry for 100 years which is far too long because the price will
far too long because the price will probably significantly increase in that
probably significantly increase in that lifetime but if you have a maximum
lifetime but if you have a maximum lifetime of say six months it's unlikely
lifetime of say six months it's unlikely that a storage contract interface could
that a storage contract interface could be profitable with only six months
be profitable with only six months difference between the initial rent fee
difference between the initial rent fee paid and then the rent you they'd be
paid and then the rent you they'd be providing their users and so I think the
providing their users and so I think the plan is if we do expiration ledgers is
plan is if we do expiration ledgers is to have a network parameter which is the
to have a network parameter which is the maximum rent or the maximum lifetime of
maximum rent or the maximum lifetime of a given entry on The Ledger and so this
a given entry on The Ledger and so this could be something like six months or
could be something like six months or one year and this would be a network
one year and this would be a network parameter and so what we can do is you
parameter and so what we can do is you want this value to be as large as
want this value to be as large as possible from a user perspective just so
possible from a user perspective just so you can provide the most flexibility and
you can provide the most flexibility and usability but you want to be small
usability but you want to be small enough such that you don't have these
enough such that you don't have these rent related exploits and so that would
rent related exploits and so that would be a number that we can change by a
be a number that we can change by a network vote just so that we can
network vote just so that we can essentially tune this value up or down
essentially tune this value up or down as we see exploits happening on the
as we see exploits happening on the network or as we see that no exploits
network or as we see that no exploits are happening on the network
are happening on the network in addition to this issue we also
in addition to this issue we also kind of like the middleman storage
kind of like the middleman storage contract we also want to make sure that
contract we also want to make sure that we're not allowing a bunch of spam
we're not allowing a bunch of spam entries to lock in very low rates take
entries to lock in very low rates take up space on the network and essentially
up space on the network and essentially up the price for everyone else that's
up the price for everyone else that's doing legitimate work that's not spam
doing legitimate work that's not spam and so you can imagine that on Day Zero
and so you can imagine that on Day Zero when the you know buckless has a small
when the you know buckless has a small you have a bunch of airdrops that take
you have a bunch of airdrops that take whatever the maximum lifetime is say six
whatever the maximum lifetime is say six months a year or whatever and then
months a year or whatever and then essentially just mint spam airdrop
essentially just mint spam airdrop tokens and tell the bucket list size
tokens and tell the bucket list size increases such that's no longer
increases such that's no longer profitable
profitable now the issue with this is that they can
now the issue with this is that they can essentially even though you know each
essentially even though you know each additional spam token they put on the
additional spam token they put on the network raises the rent fees slightly
network raises the rent fees slightly for the next spam token they can still
for the next spam token they can still do this very fast and very quickly take
do this very fast and very quickly take up the cheapest rent options with all of
up the cheapest rent options with all of this spam and unlike an event balance
this spam and unlike an event balance approach even though the spam has caused
approach even though the spam has caused the rent fees to be high for everyone
the rent fees to be high for everyone else because the spam did it first they
else because the spam did it first they are not subject to those higher fees and
are not subject to those higher fees and you can't evict them which means you can
you can't evict them which means you can have like this essentially these
have like this essentially these events where if for whatever reason the
events where if for whatever reason the bucket list size decreases in the rent
bucket list size decreases in the rent fee decreases rapidly you can have all
fee decreases rapidly you can have all these spam tokens kind of come in and
these spam tokens kind of come in and fill the Gap in very quickly get the
fill the Gap in very quickly get the network up to that you know high rent
network up to that you know high rent fee rate again at the cost of all of
fee rate again at the cost of all of these spam entries taking up more time
these spam entries taking up more time than they probably should
than they probably should and so I think that's probably where I
and so I think that's probably where I want to get the conversation started
want to get the conversation started and open up the floor of questions but
and open up the floor of questions but those are the biggest pros and cons
those are the biggest pros and cons of each the pros of rent balance being
of each the pros of rent balance being you know this eviction pressure and
you know this eviction pressure and defining these exploits natively without
defining these exploits natively without like the need for like a maximum rent
like the need for like a maximum rent balance or something like that the con
balance or something like that the con being Downstream systems and usability
being Downstream systems and usability Garand there was a question around
Garand there was a question around the downstream systems can you just
the downstream systems can you just quickly outline the the difference or
quickly outline the the difference or specifically with exploration Ledger
specifically with exploration Ledger what would be the downstream systems
what would be the downstream systems kind of like expectations yeah so I
kind of like expectations yeah so I think the the the issue with the
think the the the issue with the rent balance versus expiration Ledger is
rent balance versus expiration Ledger is just that an expiration letter we can
just that an expiration letter we can put in meta so that the downstream
put in meta so that the downstream systems can be directly told what the
systems can be directly told what the expiration Ledger is but there's no way
expiration Ledger is but there's no way to emit meta for the variable rent
to emit meta for the variable rent balance bombs just because they're too
balance bombs just because they're too frequent so for instance with expiration
frequent so for instance with expiration Ledger just because it's set a single
Ledger just because it's set a single time on creation or whenever an entry
time on creation or whenever an entry has its is expiration or its
has its is expiration or its lifetime extended what you can do is
lifetime extended what you can do is just emit meta that says okay this key
just emit meta that says okay this key has this lifetime and then they start in
has this lifetime and then they start in a SQL database and then whenever you
a SQL database and then whenever you access that entry you can just spit out
access that entry you can just spit out the lifetime easy and so you can contain
the lifetime easy and so you can contain all that information in meta with rent
all that information in meta with rent balance the issue is the initial rep
balance the issue is the initial rep balance is in the meta sure so say like
balance is in the meta sure so say like this has a starting value of a thousand
this has a starting value of a thousand xlm but the issue is every Ledger has a
xlm but the issue is every Ledger has a variable amount that's deducted from
variable amount that's deducted from that thousand xlm and because every
that thousand xlm and because every single Ledger or every single Ledger
single Ledger or every single Ledger entry is subject to this variable rent
entry is subject to this variable rent every single Ledger closed what we'd
every single Ledger closed what we'd have to do is if to contain this
have to do is if to contain this information in meta literally submit a
information in meta literally submit a meta entry for every single entry on The
meta entry for every single entry on The Ledger periodically with the updated
Ledger periodically with the updated rent information and that's just not
rent information and that's just not possible and so essentially the
possible and so essentially the downstream systems would have to manage
downstream systems would have to manage this rent balance themselves and we
this rent balance themselves and we could probably emit the variable rent
could probably emit the variable rent fee as meta every Ledger close but then
fee as meta every Ledger close but then it would be the responsibility of the
it would be the responsibility of the downstream systems to implement
downstream systems to implement essentially the rent balance bookkeeping
essentially the rent balance bookkeeping themselves if that makes sense
foreign
it does sound for the most part like like a win-win so I definitely want to
like a win-win so I definitely want to un probably focus on like what are
un probably focus on like what are the pros
the pros of
of of the current Red Diamond system
of the current Red Diamond system compared to exploration Ledger
compared to exploration Ledger yes I think the it comes to to eviction
yes I think the it comes to to eviction pressure and kind of
pressure and kind of not being exploitable or being
not being exploitable or being more game proof and so that's the
more game proof and so that's the primary issue with locking in a
primary issue with locking in a essentially a rent fee at creation time
essentially a rent fee at creation time is that you open up these
is that you open up these vulnerabilities for the kind of like a
vulnerabilities for the kind of like a contract storage middleman and for a
contract storage middleman and for a long life spam entries that increase
long life spam entries that increase rent fees for everyone else and so those
rent fees for everyone else and so those are the two kind of I think exploits
are the two kind of I think exploits that we want to prevent happening
that we want to prevent happening and so if we can find essentially a
and so if we can find essentially a suitable limitations on the
suitable limitations on the expiration Ledger like one limitation
expiration Ledger like one limitation being not allowing arbitrarily large
being not allowing arbitrarily large lifetimes to defeat those two exploits
lifetimes to defeat those two exploits then I think it would be a good a good
then I think it would be a good a good decision there's also a couple of other
decision there's also a couple of other drawbacks I think these are all solvable
drawbacks I think these are all solvable problems but just something to think
problems but just something to think about is that there's certain issues
about is that there's certain issues like because you're locking in an
like because you're locking in an expiration Ledger
expiration Ledger there are questions about what to do
there are questions about what to do whenever you resize an entry so for
whenever you resize an entry so for instance say you create an entry that's
instance say you create an entry that's only one byte large and say okay I want
only one byte large and say okay I want it to have an expiration Ledger 10 years
it to have an expiration Ledger 10 years from now and so you pay the rent fee
from now and so you pay the rent fee for 10 years but for only one byte
for 10 years but for only one byte and then two ledgers later you say oh
and then two ledgers later you say oh this entry is now 100 kilobytes
this entry is now 100 kilobytes then you essentially need to
then you essentially need to reconcile okay what do we do in this
reconcile okay what do we do in this situation do we either a shorten the
situation do we either a shorten the lifetime because the rent fee is now
lifetime because the rent fee is now higher because it's you know a larger
higher because it's you know a larger entry size
entry size just for reference the rent fee is
just for reference the rent fee is charged per byte and so you need to pay
charged per byte and so you need to pay more rent in order to have the same
more rent in order to have the same expiration Ledger you did before and so
expiration Ledger you did before and so my current thinking for that particular
my current thinking for that particular Edge case is that the expiration Ledger
Edge case is that the expiration Ledger should never decrease for instance a
should never decrease for instance a write or an update or changing the size
write or an update or changing the size of an entry should never decrease its
of an entry should never decrease its lifetime it should only match or
lifetime it should only match or increase the lifetime which means that
increase the lifetime which means that if you have an entry that has say 10
if you have an entry that has say 10 years worth of
years worth of or that has an expiration Ledger 10
or that has an expiration Ledger 10 years in the future if you resize that
years in the future if you resize that entry then you what you need to do is
entry then you what you need to do is you need to pay for essentially the
you need to pay for essentially the difference so you'd have to pay in this
difference so you'd have to pay in this example if you had a one byte entry and
example if you had a one byte entry and now it's a you know 10 byte entry you'd
now it's a you know 10 byte entry you'd have to pay for 10 bytes or for the nine
have to pay for 10 bytes or for the nine additional bytes
additional bytes whenever you do that update and so I
whenever you do that update and so I think there are like issues like that
think there are like issues like that and then the two exploit
and then the two exploit exploitability cases that rent balance
exploitability cases that rent balance solves really elegantly because rent
solves really elegantly because rent balance you you know it's charged
balance you you know it's charged every Ledger and so if you resize it
every Ledger and so if you resize it then they'll the you know new
then they'll the you know new additional fees will just be picked up
additional fees will just be picked up on the next Ledger and so it's handled
on the next Ledger and so it's handled automatically and then these exploits
automatically and then these exploits are not possible just because
are not possible just because your rent for your paying is always
your rent for your paying is always up to date and so you can never game the
up to date and so you can never game the system by locking in a rent fee early
system by locking in a rent fee early and then using it later when the rent
and then using it later when the rent fee is more expensive
is there anyone on stage or in the audience that want to speak in favor of
audience that want to speak in favor of rent balances
okay so yeah I just I just want to comment
so yeah I just I just want to comment on this from a from a product
on this from a from a product perspective I definitely think that this
perspective I definitely think that this is this is a big win because the user
is this is a big win because the user experience of the previous proposal
experience of the previous proposal red balances is definitely kind of
red balances is definitely kind of like requires a bit of a complex mental
like requires a bit of a complex mental model of what rent actually means
model of what rent actually means because when people you know pay rent
because when people you know pay rent they are used to kind of like locking a
they are used to kind of like locking a specific grade for a specific given of
specific grade for a specific given of time a specific given amount of time so
time a specific given amount of time so I do think that this new proposal kind
I do think that this new proposal kind of like sits better with like a mental
of like sits better with like a mental model of of what rent actually is even
model of of what rent actually is even though we're not using the word rent
though we're not using the word rent here
here
one question that I also asked on Discord
Discord is around a the question of
is around a the question of temporary entries and to the question of
temporary entries and to the question of like Auto bumps and what is what are the
like Auto bumps and what is what are the implications for these
implications for these yeah so I think my current thinking is
yeah so I think my current thinking is that we should still have Auto bumps
that we should still have Auto bumps but the auto bump should be optional
but the auto bump should be optional and optional well let me explain what
and optional well let me explain what I mean by optional and so I think in
I mean by optional and so I think in this system we still want an auto bump
this system we still want an auto bump system such that you know frequently
system such that you know frequently used entries
used entries and shared entries such as contract
and shared entries such as contract instances and contract code wasm are
instances and contract code wasm are paid for and so that was envisioning is
paid for and so that was envisioning is that before we were like bumping by some
that before we were like bumping by some you know amount of xlm now because we
you know amount of xlm now because we have this expiration Ledger interface we
have this expiration Ledger interface we would just Bump by some modest amount
would just Bump by some modest amount like 10 ledgers per access
like 10 ledgers per access automatically and some of that would
automatically and some of that would look like is that you would pay at the
look like is that you would pay at the current market rate
current market rate whatever the current rent fee is for
whatever the current rent fee is for the extension and so even if the entries
the extension and so even if the entries say had like three years worth of rent
say had like three years worth of rent that was paid for two years ago so it
that was paid for two years ago so it was very cheap whenever you access it
was very cheap whenever you access it you would still need to pay for the
you would still need to pay for the additional 10 ledgers at the current
additional 10 ledgers at the current market rate
market rate and so that's for automatic bumps I
and so that's for automatic bumps I think
think what we should do for auto bumps is
what we should do for auto bumps is especially for temporary entries there
especially for temporary entries there were use cases where other bumps are
were use cases where other bumps are useful and use cases where Auto bumps
useful and use cases where Auto bumps are not and so I think when creating an
are not and so I think when creating an entry what you should do is on the
entry what you should do is on the initial item creation you can set a flag
initial item creation you can set a flag and that flag is either Auto bumps true
and that flag is either Auto bumps true false and so
false and so what this allows you to do is that
what this allows you to do is that the original developer when you're
the original developer when you're creating the entry can choose if this
creating the entry can choose if this entry is something that should be bumped
entry is something that should be bumped or something that is like you know
or something that is like you know short-lived so it should expire and then
short-lived so it should expire and then whenever you access that entry that
whenever you access that entry that flag is stored in The Ledger entry and
flag is stored in The Ledger entry and so the Access Auto bump is determined by
so the Access Auto bump is determined by that initial create time flag and so I
that initial create time flag and so I think Auto bumps are optional but
think Auto bumps are optional but they're not optional by The Entity
they're not optional by The Entity that's accessing the entry they're
that's accessing the entry they're optional based on the entity that's
optional based on the entity that's creating the entry if that makes sense
creating the entry if that makes sense and so I think that makes the most sense
and so I think that makes the most sense now another thing for temporary entries
now another thing for temporary entries is because we now have this expiration
is because we now have this expiration Ledger I know before we kind of went
Ledger I know before we kind of went back and forth as to you know if we
back and forth as to you know if we should have expert or temporary entries
should have expert or temporary entries with like firm or exact
with like firm or exact cut-offs or not or like that expire
cut-offs or not or like that expire on the exact Ledger entries and so I
on the exact Ledger entries and so I think under this system
think under this system now that we don't use rent balances
now that we don't use rent balances that should be very possible and easy to
that should be very possible and easy to do such that you can now use temporary
do such that you can now use temporary entries for security features such that
entries for security features such that if you want an entry that lasts exactly
if you want an entry that lasts exactly 100 ledgers what you would do is just
100 ledgers what you would do is just say make a temporary entry set the
say make a temporary entry set the expiration ledger to you know or set
expiration ledger to you know or set the TTL to 100 and then set auto bump to
the TTL to 100 and then set auto bump to false
false now I think
now I think we still need to actually I still
we still need to actually I still need to think about that a little bit
need to think about that a little bit more as to if we can because right
more as to if we can because right now we are allowing both temporary and
now we are allowing both temporary and restorable entries to be bumped by
restorable entries to be bumped by anyone anytime and so I take back that
anyone anytime and so I take back that said they still might not be appropriate
said they still might not be appropriate for security uses out of the box
for security uses out of the box but so what I'm kind of envisioning
but so what I'm kind of envisioning right now is the autobump flag and then
right now is the autobump flag and then in addition to the automatic bumps on
in addition to the automatic bumps on access which both temporary and
access which both temporary and restorable entries
restorable entries have you can also still manually
have you can also still manually bump any entry both temporary and
bump any entry both temporary and restorable
restorable via an operation and that operation
via an operation and that operation is similar to what was in rent balance
is similar to what was in rent balance but now you just specify the new
but now you just specify the new expiration Ledger and then my thinking
expiration Ledger and then my thinking is that whenever you bump or whenever
is that whenever you bump or whenever you pay for more you can either
you pay for more you can either there's two options here sorry
October were you saying something no sorry
no sorry oh so I think there's whenever you
oh so I think there's whenever you do a manual bump operation to extend the
do a manual bump operation to extend the expiration Ledger there are two ways we
expiration Ledger there are two ways we could think about it first you could
could think about it first you could either be credited for the amount you've
either be credited for the amount you've already paid and then view it as an
already paid and then view it as an extension so for instance say
extension so for instance say you know I have a ledger that's set
you know I have a ledger that's set to expire in a year and I want to expire
to expire in a year and I want to expire it to expire in 18 months one potential
it to expire in 18 months one potential solution would be the rent bump
solution would be the rent bump operation only charges you at the
operation only charges you at the current market rate for six more months
current market rate for six more months of rent it says hey there's already you
of rent it says hey there's already you know 12 months of rent here so we're
know 12 months of rent here so we're only going to charge you for the
only going to charge you for the additional six so the total comes out to
additional six so the total comes out to 18 months that's option one now the
18 months that's option one now the drawback to that option is again for
drawback to that option is again for that first 12 months you're locking in a
that first 12 months you're locking in a lower rate
lower rate in that last six months is now at the
in that last six months is now at the market rate so that's option one option
market rate so that's option one option two is that whenever you do a manual
two is that whenever you do a manual bump you don't count the previous
bump you don't count the previous balance and the previous balance is
balance and the previous balance is burned
burned what this would be is that if you
what this would be is that if you know there's an entry that you want to
know there's an entry that you want to live 18 months but it currently lives it
live 18 months but it currently lives it currently has an expiration that's only
currently has an expiration that's only 12 months in the future you have to pay
12 months in the future you have to pay 18 months of rent at the current market
18 months of rent at the current market price and then the expiration Ledger is
price and then the expiration Ledger is reset and that in this way essentially
reset and that in this way essentially the 12 months that it was already there
the 12 months that it was already there is burned and you're charged for the
is burned and you're charged for the entire 18 months of the market rate
entire 18 months of the market rate now the advantage to this
now the advantage to this is again I think for a Network Health
is again I think for a Network Health perspective and to prevent capability we
perspective and to prevent capability we want to be charging as close to Market
want to be charging as close to Market rates whenever we can and so in this
rates whenever we can and so in this system you always can be charging you
system you always can be charging you know the market rate however it's kind
know the market rate however it's kind of a poor ux because you're burning this
of a poor ux because you're burning this amount
amount it seems that like in something like
it seems that like in something like this should be probably strictly
this should be probably strictly additive and so I guess as far as the
additive and so I guess as far as the the two interfaces are concerned what
the two interfaces are concerned what are your thoughts as two manual rent
are your thoughts as two manual rent bumps
that was a lot I just want to go back to a point you made earlier quickly
to a point you made earlier quickly about temporary entries so if I
about temporary entries so if I understand correctly you are suggesting
understand correctly you are suggesting that the temporary entries if we do go
that the temporary entries if we do go for Ledger expert for expiration
for Ledger expert for expiration Ledger the the
Ledger the the the contract should be the same that
the contract should be the same that is we're kind of like letting go of the
is we're kind of like letting go of the whole
whole short medium long terms and making it
short medium long terms and making it the exact same interface as restorable
the exact same interface as restorable Ledger entries
Ledger entries yeah I think so now the one thing though
yeah I think so now the one thing though is I initially said they were fit for
is I initially said they were fit for security uses but then I caught myself
security uses but then I caught myself because right now any user can bump any
because right now any user can bump any entry which means that even if you
entry which means that even if you have say like a kyc entry that's only
have say like a kyc entry that's only supposed to last 128 ledgers and you
supposed to last 128 ledgers and you initially set its expiration alleged
initially set its expiration alleged to be 128 ledgers in the future a
to be 128 ledgers in the future a malicious user could bump that using the
malicious user could bump that using the manual operation and so I think for
manual operation and so I think for security purposes
security purposes we still need to that still needs to
we still need to that still needs to be enforced at the contract level
be enforced at the contract level whereas like in this case the contract
whereas like in this case the contract would need to embed their own like TTL
would need to embed their own like TTL inside the temporary entry
inside the temporary entry just because you have this arbitrary
just because you have this arbitrary bump I mean I guess we could
bump I mean I guess we could have a flag that's like no bump to
have a flag that's like no bump to Temporary entries
Temporary entries but that might be adding too many
but that might be adding too many flags at this point because the
flags at this point because the current interfaces anyone can bump
current interfaces anyone can bump anything
okay thanks for answering that question going back to Auto bumps for a
question going back to Auto bumps for a second I do think you know I've been
second I do think you know I've been thinking about the the wallet and dap
thinking about the the wallet and dap experience
experience and what they need to think about in
and what they need to think about in terms of State expiration
terms of State expiration and it does seem like autobump doesn't
and it does seem like autobump doesn't negate the need for wallets and dapps to
negate the need for wallets and dapps to actually be attentive to The Ledger
actually be attentive to The Ledger expiration times and to and to act on
expiration times and to and to act on that either
that either either by like suggesting the user to
either by like suggesting the user to do like a manual bump or to initiate a
do like a manual bump or to initiate a manual bump so it it does seem like Auto
manual bump so it it does seem like Auto bump
bump
has this like implicit Behavior to it in which we're like extending Ledger
which we're like extending Ledger entry expression times but it doesn't
entry expression times but it doesn't actually
actually it like adds complexity to the system
it like adds complexity to the system but it doesn't actually remove
but it doesn't actually remove complexity from the implementation of
complexity from the implementation of of like products it makes things a bit
of like products it makes things a bit less
less expected and predictable
expected and predictable so I think
so I think yeah go ahead well I think the the
yeah go ahead well I think the the auto bumps serve a very specific purpose
auto bumps serve a very specific purpose or at least they were initially designed
or at least they were initially designed to serve a specific purpose and this is
to serve a specific purpose and this is the shared state so from your example
the shared state so from your example like like a Dap or like a wallet
like like a Dap or like a wallet right
right this is not a good example for
this is not a good example for auto bumps because you have a particular
auto bumps because you have a particular balance entry that you care about and no
balance entry that you care about and no one else really cares about and so for a
one else really cares about and so for a wallet perspective
wallet perspective say you want your wallet to live for
say you want your wallet to live for one year the correct answer is not just
one year the correct answer is not just to keep you balancing it with via Smart
to keep you balancing it with via Smart contract so you Auto bump it or rather
contract so you Auto bump it or rather just to do a manual operation and then
just to do a manual operation and then to bump that by a year the use case for
to bump that by a year the use case for autobums is more for contract instances
autobums is more for contract instances and contract wasm particularly wasm is a
and contract wasm particularly wasm is a difficult one because you can have a
difficult one because you can have a single wazzin blob that many different
single wazzin blob that many different contract instances use and the question
contract instances use and the question is who pays for that was and blob and so
is who pays for that was and blob and so essentially by having like this Auto
essentially by having like this Auto bump feature that every user who touches
bump feature that every user who touches it is required to pay a little bit
it is required to pay a little bit and you can essentially like share the
and you can essentially like share the cost of you know this contract and this
cost of you know this contract and this contract instance or this contract code
contract instance or this contract code in this contract instance among all the
in this contract instance among all the users who are using it and so I think
users who are using it and so I think the other bump feature was specifically
the other bump feature was specifically for these kind of shared resources
for these kind of shared resources that there is no clear owner
that there is no clear owner for instance like usdc it'd be kind
for instance like usdc it'd be kind of a crappy interface if you know 10 000
of a crappy interface if you know 10 000 people used it a day but there was no
people used it a day but there was no Auto bump and then the 10 000 in first
Auto bump and then the 10 000 in first person had to go pay rent because it got
person had to go pay rent because it got archived or something and he was just
archived or something and he was just the or they were just the The Unlucky
the or they were just the The Unlucky user that drawed the Short Straw and so
user that drawed the Short Straw and so I think there definitely still is a
I think there definitely still is a pretty strong use case for auto bumps
pretty strong use case for auto bumps for these sort of different entry types
for these sort of different entry types but I agree for something like a
but I agree for something like a adapter a wallet you would still need
adapter a wallet you would still need you know this manual operation in
you know this manual operation in addition to audit bumps
oh would you recommend a ledger entry that
would you recommend a ledger entry that is a user specific like a balance or an
is a user specific like a balance or an LP position
LP position to be Auto bumpable or not Auto bumpable
I mean I think it just depends on the contract
I think it just depends on the contract implementation I don't think it needs to
implementation I don't think it needs to be Auto bumpable the same way that
be Auto bumpable the same way that contract instances and stuff do
contract instances and stuff do but I don't see like a downside I think
but I don't see like a downside I think the general thinking is
the general thinking is the the kind of design model I had in
the the kind of design model I had in my head is that extending a lifetime
my head is that extending a lifetime should never be negative
should never be negative that like this is why it's not good
that like this is why it's not good for security cases because anyone can
for security cases because anyone can extend any lifetime such that it should
extend any lifetime such that it should always be a positive action it cannot
always be a positive action it cannot be a negative action
be a negative action and so I think
and so I think you know I think there was talks last
you know I think there was talks last time of exposing an Autobahn flag and
time of exposing an Autobahn flag and I think this probably makes the most
I think this probably makes the most sense that you know contract instances
sense that you know contract instances and contract wise in code
and contract wise in code you don't have this option whenever
you don't have this option whenever you deploy it it has it must be Auto
you deploy it it has it must be Auto bumped but then for any other key you
bumped but then for any other key you create I think you probably just give
create I think you probably just give the option too or or should we just
the option too or or should we just because there's also like I mean you
because there's also like I mean you could also say that the contract
could also say that the contract instances and contract code are Auto
instances and contract code are Auto bumped and nothing else is but then you
bumped and nothing else is but then you can kind of get into this sticky
can kind of get into this sticky situation where there are still contract
situation where there are still contract types that have shared States so for
types that have shared States so for instance if you can think like a a
instance if you can think like a a like a DEX right and there's like
like a DEX right and there's like this asset pair that start as an
this asset pair that start as an entry and many different people are like
entry and many different people are like viewing or trading that asset pair you
viewing or trading that asset pair you wouldn't want one individual to be stuck
wouldn't want one individual to be stuck with the bill and so I think that there
with the bill and so I think that there are still I still think Auto bump is a
are still I still think Auto bump is a powerful primitive and I think it should
powerful primitive and I think it should probably be enabled by default just
probably be enabled by default just because it's the safest route
because it's the safest route but I think you know having a
but I think you know having a option to turn it off especially for
option to turn it off especially for personal State like balances is probably
personal State like balances is probably a good idea and so now that I've
a good idea and so now that I've talked for a little bit I think the
talked for a little bit I think the answer your question I would probably
answer your question I would probably say for something like a token balance I
say for something like a token balance I would probably say no to the auto bump
would probably say no to the auto bump Behavior just because it's something
Behavior just because it's something that will probably like the lifetime of
that will probably like the lifetime of which will be explicitly managed by a
which will be explicitly managed by a wallet
because I I agree it's kind of needed the one thing that maybe like I'm
the one thing that maybe like I'm thinking about there is that
thinking about there is that so for the first version we can do you
so for the first version we can do you know something like that right like I
know something like that right like I would imagine that maybe
would imagine that maybe in the future we would want to have like
in the future we would want to have like
maybe something that that kind of Auto Tunes over time
that kind of Auto Tunes over time because like in the example of like the
because like in the example of like the
you have like a very you know active contract the wazam is basically going to
contract the wazam is basically going to be used multiple times per Ledger
be used multiple times per Ledger and you end up with really reaching your
and you end up with really reaching your limit fairly quickly and then when
limit fairly quickly and then when the limit is reach you actually are
the limit is reach you actually are backed into that situation where
backed into that situation where you know some users are going to bump
you know some users are going to bump some are not going to bump
some are not going to bump like basically the first one in The
like basically the first one in The Ledger all right and the bumping
Ledger all right and the bumping and then
and then
yeah and that and also like the if the what if the blob is is fairly large
maybe that auto bump on the ends up adding quite a bit of cost to each
adding quite a bit of cost to each individual transaction
individual transaction if it's you know bumping like for a good
if it's you know bumping like for a good number of Legends let's say you know 100
number of Legends let's say you know 100 ledgers or something
ledgers or something to keep in mind
Garen there is a question about the mechanics of Autobahn from Paul can you
mechanics of Autobahn from Paul can you expand a bit on when does Auto bump
expand a bit on when does Auto bump actually occur
actually occur yeah so the current strategy is that
yeah so the current strategy is that autobump occurs on all access which is
autobump occurs on all access which is both read and write access
both read and write access how this works under the hood is that
how this works under the hood is that you know in addition to having the
you know in addition to having the expiration Ledger stored in The Ledger
expiration Ledger stored in The Ledger entry we also have like this kind of
entry we also have like this kind of shell entry type
shell entry type that is used for read-only Access so
that is used for read-only Access so for instance like for your wasin blob
for instance like for your wasin blob they're only access read only and
they're only access read only and essentially to modify a ledger entry in
essentially to modify a ledger entry in The Bucket List you have to rewrite the
The Bucket List you have to rewrite the entire entry at the top level bucket
entire entry at the top level bucket and so if we were to modify the you
and so if we were to modify the you know the entry or the the expiration
know the entry or the the expiration Ledger directly in The Ledger entry
Ledger directly in The Ledger entry you'd have to rewrite the entire wasin
you'd have to rewrite the entire wasin blob and So to avoid this we have like
blob and So to avoid this we have like this kind of shim entry type which is
this kind of shim entry type which is just an expiration Ledger extension and
just an expiration Ledger extension and so this entry is very small it's
so this entry is very small it's literally just a key and then the new
literally just a key and then the new expiration Ledger and so we use this
expiration Ledger and so we use this entry type
entry type whenever we want to bump a read-only
whenever we want to bump a read-only entry and so in the wasm use case even
entry and so in the wasm use case even though you're only reading the wasm
though you're only reading the wasm because we are Auto bumping you do
because we are Auto bumping you do have to do a small write but that right
have to do a small write but that right is very small it's the minimal size
is very small it's the minimal size right you can do and so we are
right you can do and so we are implicitly turning every read into a
implicitly turning every read into a read write
read write but we're not rewriting the entire
but we're not rewriting the entire entry we're reading the entire entry and
entry we're reading the entire entry and then writing a very small entry with the
then writing a very small entry with the new expiration Ledger and so under the
new expiration Ledger and so under the hood that's how we implement it
hood that's how we implement it efficiently
efficiently rent bumps for both reads and writes
so I do want to touch on something that you
I do want to touch on something that you mentioned before which is the question
mentioned before which is the question of with should bumping
of with should bumping like pumping in general should that
like pumping in general should that be a flag it does feel like you know
be a flag it does feel like you know last week we talked a bit about
last week we talked a bit about you know very various Oracle usage
you know very various Oracle usage patterns and you know we got to
patterns and you know we got to inclusion where sometimes the contract
inclusion where sometimes the contract developer would want to limit or give an
developer would want to limit or give an upper boundary to when a ledger entry
upper boundary to when a ledger entry should exist
should exist and
and making it non-bumpable is a very kind of
making it non-bumpable is a very kind of like easy way to do that
like easy way to do that the question is like does that
the question is like does that over complex the system
over complex the system well so I guess we have we have two
well so I guess we have we have two different questions here
different questions here I think we have the question of do we
I think we have the question of do we want to
want to does the entry
does the entry Auto bump and then does the entry
Auto bump and then does the entry allow bumps
allow bumps and so I think from an implementation
and so I think from an implementation standpoint these would be very easy to
standpoint these would be very easy to implement
implement we could just you know thrown a Flags
we could just you know thrown a Flags field on The Ledger entry
field on The Ledger entry and Define a couple of flags I think
and Define a couple of flags I think the question is
the question is is this you know making the user
is this you know making the user experience too complex
experience too complex and so what this would look like is I
and so what this would look like is I think
think
this would only be explicable to Temporary entries I think
Temporary entries I think or Okay so let's talk about the
or Okay so let's talk about the Autobahn flag first I think the Autobahn
Autobahn flag first I think the Autobahn flag
flag whether or not this item is auto
whether or not this item is auto bumped on access it could be an optional
bumped on access it could be an optional flag for both temporary and restorable
flag for both temporary and restorable entries but I think it should be
entries but I think it should be strictly enforced for contract wasm and
strictly enforced for contract wasm and contract instances now for the should
contract instances now for the should you allow bumps at all I think we could
you allow bumps at all I think we could allow that flag but that flag could only
allow that flag but that flag could only be used for temporary entries
be used for temporary entries and so this would be the use case
and so this would be the use case where you either have like a security
where you either have like a security use case
use case where you want this to do exactly
where you want this to do exactly some number of ledgers or the Oracle use
some number of ledgers or the Oracle use case where the thing is only valid for
case where the thing is only valid for five minutes or whatever and then if you
five minutes or whatever and then if you set this flag then this entry would not
set this flag then this entry would not receive Auto bumps and it would also not
receive Auto bumps and it would also not be bumpable by the manual operation and
be bumpable by the manual operation and if you tried to bump it it would just
if you tried to bump it it would just fail or Panic or something like that now
fail or Panic or something like that now you would only want this black on
you would only want this black on temporary entries because restorable
temporary entries because restorable entries and unique entries should always
entries and unique entries should always be bumpable
be bumpable they they don't necessarily need to
they they don't necessarily need to always have Auto bombs but they should
always have Auto bombs but they should always be bumpable just because they are
always be bumpable just because they are important information that needs to be
important information that needs to be saved which is why they are subject to
saved which is why they are subject to being sent to the state expiration node
being sent to the state expiration node when they expired and so just because
when they expired and so just because the design parameter for this entry
the design parameter for this entry is that it's supposed to be important
is that it's supposed to be important live State
live State there should be no use cases where
there should be no use cases where you wouldn't want to bump or wouldn't
you wouldn't want to bump or wouldn't want to allow a unique or restorable
want to allow a unique or restorable entry to be bumpable and so I think that
entry to be bumpable and so I think that is the the most technically complete
is the the most technically complete kind of interface
kind of interface it's very you know feasible from a
it's very you know feasible from a core perspective the only question is if
core perspective the only question is if that's too much complexity at the end
that's too much complexity at the end user
foreign
I think that as you described this If it creates more Divergence between
If it creates more Divergence between temporary entries and restorable entries
temporary entries and restorable entries then
then probably for the sake of Simplicity I
probably for the sake of Simplicity I say we shouldn't include it especially
say we shouldn't include it especially because this is something that the
because this is something that the contract developer can program for in
contract developer can program for in their contract
their contract I will say if we if we go this route and
I will say if we if we go this route and say if we I think so so if I'm
say if we I think so so if I'm understanding it correctly we don't want
understanding it correctly we don't want Divergence and so we'd have an autobump
Divergence and so we'd have an autobump flag
flag true false but we would not have the
true false but we would not have the no bump flag I think if we go this route
no bump flag I think if we go this route we need to be very clear in our
we need to be very clear in our documentation that the expiration Ledger
documentation that the expiration Ledger is not absolute
is not absolute because if you know have like a
because if you know have like a temporary entry self-delink entry and
temporary entry self-delink entry and then there's a field called expiration
then there's a field called expiration Ledger it's a reasonable assumption that
Ledger it's a reasonable assumption that The Ledger would be deleted immediately
The Ledger would be deleted immediately after that ledger and if we don't have
after that ledger and if we don't have this no bump flag that's not the case
this no bump flag that's not the case because a malicious user could you know
because a malicious user could you know invoke the operation and bump any
invoke the operation and bump any temporary entry even if autobump is
temporary entry even if autobump is disabled and so you know I think
disabled and so you know I think that's a fine interface decision to make
that's a fine interface decision to make that all entries are bumpable but I
that all entries are bumpable but I think we need to make that very clear
think we need to make that very clear just from a ux perspective so that we
just from a ux perspective so that we don't have security issues with
don't have security issues with temporary entries being used improperly
any questions or comments on this what do people think about
what do people think about should we have the bump bumpable flag
I'm just going to type a big thing but I could actually say it
could actually say it I think I would vote for having
I think I would vote for having not having an Autobahn flag
not having an Autobahn flag if possible just having a fewer
if possible just having a fewer configuration options for the different
configuration options for the different types of storage like there's two
types of storage like there's two different types of storage and they act
different types of storage and they act differently I think that's fine to
differently I think that's fine to explain and understand
explain and understand but if you have to say okay there's
but if you have to say okay there's restorable entries and there's temporary
restorable entries and there's temporary entries and they act in this way unless
entries and they act in this way unless you enable auto bump on them and then
you enable auto bump on them and then restore volunteers like you know what I
restore volunteers like you know what I mean there's like four different
mean there's like four different configurations Now versus just two
configurations Now versus just two so Paul are you talking about the
so Paul are you talking about the bumpable flag or the auto bumpable flag
bumpable flag or the auto bumpable flag sorry yes sorry pumpable okay
yeah I think that makes sense to me it's just not everything is bumped
just not everything is bumped but just so I understand are we still
but just so I understand are we still interested in the Autobahn flag or do
interested in the Autobahn flag or do we also want to Nick say that and just
we also want to Nick say that and just say everything I bumps as well
I definitely don't think that everything should be Auto bumpable by default
should be Auto bumpable by default
yeah it does sound like for from a completeness perspective having both of
completeness perspective having both of these flags kind of like covers
these flags kind of like covers
most use cases
I mean one thing we can do is just like if we don't want to expose the
just like if we don't want to expose the bumpable flag now we can just Define it
bumpable flag now we can just Define it in the xdr and defined in core just not
in the xdr and defined in core just not exposing the SDK
exposing the SDK and then turn that on V2 if we want
and then turn that on V2 if we want to you know have a more complicated ux
to you know have a more complicated ux Matrix for storage
Matrix for storage that would at least give us future
that would at least give us future proofing or like I think actually if we
proofing or like I think actually if we just
just if if we were defining Auto bump anyway
if if we were defining Auto bump anyway then we need to have a Flags field
then we need to have a Flags field for the album flag and so we can easily
for the album flag and so we can easily extend it later
extend it later and so I think you know the bumpable
and so I think you know the bumpable versus no bumpable that could be a V2
versus no bumpable that could be a V2 feature
feature but I think unless there's like a
but I think unless there's like a strong strong one for it now we can just
strong strong one for it now we can just leave that off for now and just have the
leave that off for now and just have the autobump flag
I'm not sure that the Autobahn really benefit the network
benefit the network it might benefit the ease of use but not
it might benefit the ease of use but not necessarily the network itself right
sure I guess the you are having more more IO churn for sure
more IO churn for sure I guess the there didn't seem to be a
I guess the there didn't seem to be a great solution for the contract instance
great solution for the contract instance and contract was in the case without
and contract was in the case without Autobahn so I think you know it for it
Autobahn so I think you know it for it might be useful to say maybe like
might be useful to say maybe like I think those two entries need something
I think those two entries need something like Auto bump or need some way of
like Auto bump or need some way of essentially like automatically or
essentially like automatically or pooling rent together in some way
pooling rent together in some way because that was kind of the the the
because that was kind of the the the thing we were trying to think about with
thing we were trying to think about with the contract wasm is okay you have like
the contract wasm is okay you have like four or five different instances that
four or five different instances that all have the same was and back end how
all have the same was and back end how do you equitably and equally share the
do you equitably and equally share the load when it comes to expiration ledgers
I I think that my my the direction that I'm thinking about is that if someone
I'm thinking about is that if someone was uploading a contract
was uploading a contract I want to see his hotels involvement in
I want to see his hotels involvement in the future on maintaining that
the future on maintaining that and not so much on leaving it and
and not so much on leaving it and assuming that it will be funded by
assuming that it will be funded by someone else
like I I want to see like a activity right on that contract from the owner
right on that contract from the owner and not by someone else that might be
and not by someone else that might be inherently using it
inherently using it oh fishes that contracts don't have an
oh fishes that contracts don't have an owner like who doesn't can be reported
owner like who doesn't can be reported by anyone and you pay anyone
by anyone and you pay anyone so you know if you have a the creditable
so you know if you have a the creditable implementation that people are using
implementation that people are using there is no clear owner yes someone
there is no clear owner yes someone might have written in the code but
might have written in the code but anyone can deploy it and
anyone can deploy it and yeah it's kind of hard to track to
yeah it's kind of hard to track to anyone and demand you know maintenance
anyone and demand you know maintenance from someone
from someone I mean you could expect it but it's
I mean you could expect it but it's like the Canada universally demand this
like the Canada universally demand this yeah I feel like there's kind of the the
yeah I feel like there's kind of the the concept of like a library contract is
concept of like a library contract is definitely a big thing on ethereum and
definitely a big thing on ethereum and so it feels like an unfair expectation
so it feels like an unfair expectation to write something like a like a Dap
to write something like a like a Dap implementation that has you know that's
implementation that has you know that's that's more of a library function and
that's more of a library function and expect the library owner to be the sole
expect the library owner to be the sole payer for that even though other
payer for that even though other contract instances are using that
contract instances are using that Wiseman making money off the wasm it
Wiseman making money off the wasm it just seems weird that if five you know
just seems weird that if five you know different contract instances are using
different contract instances are using and profiting of wasm that only the you
and profiting of wasm that only the you know entity that originally deployed the
know entity that originally deployed the wasm should be on the hook for paying
wasm should be on the hook for paying for it
so I would argue that if someone is using something for free
using something for free then he shouldn't
then he shouldn't instead you should either pay the author
instead you should either pay the author right and generate money right out of
right and generate money right out of that right or basically copy it in from
that right or basically copy it in from now on he would be the owner of that
now on he would be the owner of that piece
piece what do you mean by copy though I feel
what do you mean by copy though I feel like that's why it works for Network
like that's why it works for Network perspective because now you have like
perspective because now you have like five identical copies of the same ones
five identical copies of the same ones yeah the current design is exclusively
yeah the current design is exclusively like encouraging sharing the code
like encouraging sharing the code because we don't want to store it
because we don't want to store it tens or hundreds of duplicate version
tens or hundreds of duplicate version drops because it's the biggest lecture
drops because it's the biggest lecture entries by far so you don't want to
entries by far so you don't want to encourage code to paste and you know
encourage code to paste and you know fragment system or anything and
fragment system or anything and again wait
again wait I think I I went around here but in dth
I think I I went around here but in dth for all like a lot of the things I
for all like a lot of the things I implemented by proxy patterns and Stuff
implemented by proxy patterns and Stuff Etc again a lot of instances are
Etc again a lot of instances are referring to say another single contract
referring to say another single contract instance and
instance and you know you do not deploy your own like
you know you do not deploy your own like copy of unislove and you do not maintain
copy of unislove and you do not maintain it instead of it you can just refer to a
it instead of it you can just refer to a proxied instance of unisol that is yes
proxied instance of unisol that is yes getting updated by someone probably but
getting updated by someone probably but I don't think it's fair to say that a Do
I don't think it's fair to say that a Do Your Own Thing
Your Own Thing
yeah
I know I would be happy to see some incentive model Incorporated here in is
incentive model Incorporated here in is part of that but you know maybe that's
part of that but you know maybe that's something that we need to you know like
something that we need to you know like think separately of the
think separately of the countries
do you have any thought about that
yeah I think we we should allow the we should allow contracts to be detached
should allow contracts to be detached from a concept of an owner
from a concept of an owner you know for for a lot of legal reasons
you know for for a lot of legal reasons this is better for some contracts you
this is better for some contracts you know like the uni swap contracts are not
know like the uni swap contracts are not upgradable they don't have an owner
upgradable they don't have an owner and and that's the way they want it like
and and that's the way they want it like it exists like that for a reason right
it exists like that for a reason right so I don't think we should we should
so I don't think we should we should kind of like own over emphasize this
kind of like own over emphasize this concept of an owner
that's a good argument
Aaron do you think it would be reasonable to constrain Auto bump to
reasonable to constrain Auto bump to these entries which are the ones which
these entries which are the ones which are going to benefit from the most so
are going to benefit from the most so not all ledger entry is not contract
not all ledger entry is not contract data
data but just the contract code and the
but just the contract code and the contract instances
contract instances yeah I think contract code contract
yeah I think contract code contract instances for sure
instances for sure but I think there's also the reason
but I think there's also the reason why I wanted to Define autobump is I
why I wanted to Define autobump is I think there's also
think there's also areas where contract data should be Auto
areas where contract data should be Auto bumped
bumped so like for instance like if you have a
so like for instance like if you have a tax
tax and then there are like entries on
and then there are like entries on the Decks that many users of the Dex use
the Decks that many users of the Dex use the Audubon feature is kind of just
the Audubon feature is kind of just so that these entries are kind of like
so that these entries are kind of like paid for by all users instead of you
paid for by all users instead of you know one unlucky user so I think
know one unlucky user so I think I think there's still there are
I think there's still there are definitely use cases where you'd want
definitely use cases where you'd want something like an autobump primitive for
something like an autobump primitive for contract data
contract data however I could definitely see a use
however I could definitely see a use case where this is not the default as a
case where this is not the default as a flag where contract instances and
flag where contract instances and contract wasm receive bumps
contract wasm receive bumps by requirement and then data defaults
by requirement and then data defaults to false but you can turn it on if you
to false but you can turn it on if you want
want because I still think there are
because I still think there are definitely use cases where you'd want
definitely use cases where you'd want something like this for contract data I
something like this for contract data I don't know if it's a common case but
don't know if it's a common case but there definitely are significant cases
there definitely are significant cases I think it's a very common case like
I think it's a very common case like effectively everything in a in a
effectively everything in a in a contract that is like a global variable
contract that is like a global variable or Global state that doesn't
or Global state that doesn't specifically adhere to to an account
specifically adhere to to an account like you know like in a liquidity pool
like you know like in a liquidity pool the actual like pool values are global
the actual like pool values are global and
and need to be bumped
need to be bumped we have been discussing this for some
we have been discussing this for some time what about explicitly change
time what about explicitly change the data to the contract instance like
the data to the contract instance like do we anticipate
do we anticipate some short case where you know the data
some short case where you know the data is kind of global but it's not once per
is kind of global but it's not once per contract or something if not then maybe
contract or something if not then maybe we just for the small Global state of
we just for the small Global state of the contract in the instant century and
the contract in the instant century and then you know it's subject to the same
then you know it's subject to the same Ultra bomb obviously because if you
Ultra bomb obviously because if you think about it it's kind of a part of
think about it it's kind of a part of the contract
that's another consideration here I mean I guess the question is how
mean I guess the question is how monolithic do we want to be right
monolithic do we want to be right because the issue with that is that
because the issue with that is that the so say the advantage is that like
the so say the advantage is that like if you have like a
if you have like a a contract instance that's like has a
a contract instance that's like has a very large amount Global state every
very large amount Global state every call must bump all that state whereas
call must bump all that state whereas like I said for instance where the
like I said for instance where the liquid equals so there's like a poor
liquid equals so there's like a poor implementation that has like 10
implementation that has like 10 different like asset swaps or something
different like asset swaps or something and so even if you only access one you
and so even if you only access one you have to bump the other nine implicitly
have to bump the other nine implicitly whereas
whereas if you don't title and you keep
if you don't title and you keep everything individual then you only have
everything individual then you only have to bump the entries you actually touch
to bump the entries you actually touch now I don't know like in practice
now I don't know like in practice contracts might be small enough that
contracts might be small enough that this isn't really a big issue it
this isn't really a big issue it definitely does simplify some things and
definitely does simplify some things and decreases our right amplification as
decreases our right amplification as well because you'd only need to write at
well because you'd only need to write at most one bump per contract instance
so this effectively goes sorry go aheadly
sorry go aheadly I think it's difficult to distinguish
I think it's difficult to distinguish between Global and individual because
between Global and individual because like they're definitely going to be
like they're definitely going to be contracts that have like nexuses like
contracts that have like nexuses like where it's not Global but maybe it
where it's not Global but maybe it involves like multiple participants
involves like multiple participants so
so I don't know like where do we draw the
I don't know like where do we draw the line between
line between something should be a shared cost versus
something should be a shared cost versus being an individual cost
being an individual cost seems too difficult to do that
seems too difficult to do that yeah other than like the really General
yeah other than like the really General cases of contract code should definitely
cases of contract code should definitely be a shared cost
be a shared cost
like in for contract data I don't think we can make that call like I think the
we can make that call like I think the country developers do
country developers do foreign
foreign ly think the safest option is just to
ly think the safest option is just to default this to true
default this to true and then maybe expose a flag just
and then maybe expose a flag just because I feel like the benefit or the
because I feel like the benefit or the drawback to Auto bumping something where
drawback to Auto bumping something where when it shouldn't be Auto bumped is very
when it shouldn't be Auto bumped is very minimal because the whole idea is that
minimal because the whole idea is that for the bump to be a small bump such
for the bump to be a small bump such that if lots of users are accessing it
that if lots of users are accessing it over time it grows but for instance
over time it grows but for instance right if you have a balance
right if you have a balance it you know and you say view balance
it you know and you say view balance and you have to pay 10 extra ledgers of
and you have to pay 10 extra ledgers of rent on the one entry I mean that will
rent on the one entry I mean that will literally like that might be less than
literally like that might be less than like an Excel I'd be measured in strips
like an Excel I'd be measured in strips and so I feel like the the drawback to
and so I feel like the the drawback to not having autobombs can be high if you
not having autobombs can be high if you have a shared you know you know
have a shared you know you know Global Entry that you forget to bump and
Global Entry that you forget to bump and then for the entire lifetime of that
then for the entire lifetime of that contract you have to manually bump it
contract you have to manually bump it it's expensive I feel like that's a much
it's expensive I feel like that's a much worse failure case than the other case
worse failure case than the other case where you sometimes have to pay a small
where you sometimes have to pay a small additional fee to access some entries
leaning into that is there is a really a big downside to not requiring Auto bump
big downside to not requiring Auto bump like what's not having the option not
like what's not having the option not making configurable oh yeah just like
making configurable oh yeah just like requiring it like universally
requiring it like universally yeah I personally think there's I think
yeah I personally think there's I think there's not a I think there maybe is one
there's not a I think there maybe is one negative use case we have Oracle data
negative use case we have Oracle data that should really only live for like
that should really only live for like five minutes or ten minutes
five minutes or ten minutes it would be really annoying if you
it would be really annoying if you know especially if this data is accessed
know especially if this data is accessed often in like a like a DEX sort of
often in like a like a DEX sort of environment I think that would be really
environment I think that would be really annoying if you access this thing so
annoying if you access this thing so much in a five minute lifetime such that
much in a five minute lifetime such that it always lives for like six hours or
it always lives for like six hours or like two weeks after
like two weeks after you know even though you should only
you know even though you should only do five minutes so I think for like very
do five minutes so I think for like very short-lived entries and like Oracle
short-lived entries and like Oracle data there's a strong use case
data there's a strong use case outside of that I don't see a super
outside of that I don't see a super strong use case
strong use case for for not just repairing oil pumps
for for not just repairing oil pumps everywhere
see are you suggesting setting into true
are you suggesting setting into true for every type of Entry or just for
for every type of Entry or just for restorable entries because like for the
restorable entries because like for the Oracle use case that you're describing
Oracle use case that you're describing Garand wouldn't they use temporary
Garand wouldn't they use temporary entries for that
entries for that yeah yes I think so I think right now
yeah yes I think so I think right now we are talking about a unified interface
we are talking about a unified interface where both restorable and temporary have
where both restorable and temporary have the same expiration Ledger interface and
the same expiration Ledger interface and both have the same Auto buttons
yeah I feel like contracts put in contracts avoid the issue that
put in contracts avoid the issue that you're describing
you're describing you know where you accidentally
you know where you accidentally continue to rebump a temporary entry
continue to rebump a temporary entry by
by I guess like moving on to using like a
I guess like moving on to using like a contract that uses a temporary
contract that uses a temporary for five minutes
for five minutes I guess how would people be referencing
I guess how would people be referencing that like an hour from now
that like an hour from now well no so that's the issue right so
well no so that's the issue right so it's that no one is referencing it now
it's that no one is referencing it now and for now but in that five minutes
and for now but in that five minutes enough people referenced it such that it
enough people referenced it such that it was aren't bumped so much that it will
was aren't bumped so much that it will live significantly longer than five
live significantly longer than five minutes
minutes so the issue is no one will access it
so the issue is no one will access it within an hour but it will live you know
within an hour but it will live you know an hour two hours or however long
so this I think what you're just I guess so
guess so what if Auto bumping wasn't
what if Auto bumping wasn't didn't bump it a fixed amount what if it
didn't bump it a fixed amount what if it bumped up to some cap
bumped up to some cap I mean it does bump up to some cap
I mean it does bump up to some cap because we have
because we have we have a a maximum rent balance
we have a a maximum rent balance for a maximum expiration Ledger due
for a maximum expiration Ledger due to you know issues we discussed earlier
to you know issues we discussed earlier and so there is a cap it's just that the
and so there is a cap it's just that the issue is that
issue is that you know that cap will make sense for
you know that cap will make sense for some entries but doesn't make sense for
some entries but doesn't make sense for others so for instance like if the cap
others so for instance like if the cap is six months and in the extreme case
is six months and in the extreme case you have an oracle entry That was
you have an oracle entry That was supposed to last five minutes that lasts
supposed to last five minutes that lasts up to the cap of six months that's a lot
up to the cap of six months that's a lot of wasted fees
okay so it sort of feels go ahead
go ahead sorry it's sort of so this is the last
sorry it's sort of so this is the last thing I'm going to say I think on this
thing I'm going to say I think on this it sort of feels like
it sort of feels like Auto bump okay we could argue that what
Auto bump okay we could argue that what Obama should be configurable per entry
Obama should be configurable per entry but it also sounds like the amount of
but it also sounds like the amount of this thing should be Auto bumped before
this thing should be Auto bumped before if we're making a configurable
if we're making a configurable it's not really a binary yes or no it's
it's not really a binary yes or no it's more like an amount
more like an amount like as a contract developer
like as a contract developer
the contract developers really
probably like the person who's gonna know best like how long if this is going
know best like how long if this is going to get bumped it needs to be bumped for
to get bumped it needs to be bumped for or I guess it's some combination of the
or I guess it's some combination of the contract developer and the user but
contract developer and the user but yeah just I'm a little skeptical of
yeah just I'm a little skeptical of allowing contracts to Define you know
allowing contracts to Define you know like access fee amounts right because if
like access fee amounts right because if a contract was like oh you know like
a contract was like oh you know like even if it's not malicious it's just
even if it's not malicious it's just like a stupid design it's like hey this
like a stupid design it's like hey this should have six months and it's like a
should have six months and it's like a you know a thousand or it's like a you
you know a thousand or it's like a you know 10 kilobyte entry that you know
know 10 kilobyte entry that you know requires a six-month bomb just to access
requires a six-month bomb just to access that's a pretty poor ux
that's a pretty poor ux yeah I'm like this is just the slippery
yeah I'm like this is just the slippery slope of configurability like the more I
slope of configurability like the more I yeah in some ways maybe we need
yeah in some ways maybe we need you know to Paul's Point around like
you know to Paul's Point around like the not making things configurable
maybe this is the trade-off we make we make it okay like temporary entries
make it okay like temporary entries might get bumped more than what they
might get bumped more than what they need to they might live around a little
need to they might live around a little bit longer but that's a trade-off for
bit longer but that's a trade-off for
for all these other reasons
okay so we're at time it definitely sounds like
it definitely sounds like everyone's on board with Ledger
everyone's on board with Ledger exploration moving on from rent
exploration moving on from rent balance
balance there are the questions of which
there are the questions of which flags we expose
flags we expose and there is the question that Dima
and there is the question that Dima raised about revisit revisiting the the
raised about revisit revisiting the the idea of contract attached state
idea of contract attached state which we decided against in the
which we decided against in the context of metadata but that
context of metadata but that wasn't
wasn't yeah it wasn't a landslide of
yeah it wasn't a landslide of opinions there so maybe it's worth
opinions there so maybe it's worth
rethinking about that so again it does sound like you have a lot to work
does sound like you have a lot to work with right now in terms of Ledger
with right now in terms of Ledger exploration
exploration I would try to summarize this
I would try to summarize this question about which kind of Flags
question about which kind of Flags We've we've just debated and and
We've we've just debated and and starting a discussion around that to
starting a discussion around that to give people some asynchronous time to
give people some asynchronous time to think about that
think about that and Dima if you could kind of like
and Dima if you could kind of like resurface this idea of kind of like
resurface this idea of kind of like contract attached state
contract attached state and the the benefits of that
and the the benefits of that both in this context and in others I
both in this context and in others I think that could be beneficial
Garen is there anything else you know that sounds good okay
Dima I saw you unmuted for a sec there yeah I just want to just say that
there yeah I just want to just say that yeah when I have some time oh right I
yeah when I have some time oh right I guess is that my nature with the
guess is that my nature with the contract data you said through the time
contract data you said through the time yeah so I I don't know if you have
yeah so I I don't know if you have enough time to get it shipped into the
enough time to get it shipped into the one even everyone is on board but yeah I
one even everyone is on board but yeah I need to think a bit more about this
awesome okay thank you everyone it's been
okay thank you everyone it's been a great session see y'all next week